[SQUEAKING]
[RUSTLING]
[CLICKING]
LAWRENCE GUTH: OK.
So the topic of today is sieve
theory and the large sieve,
which was the first
place that I know
of where our proofs like the
proofs that we've been talking
about appeared, and they
appeared in the context
of analytic number theory.
So we'll talk about that,
and then if there's time,
I'll try to show you a
really very closely analogous
thing in the context
of real analysis.
And we'll compare them.
OK.
All right.
So the setting of
the large sieve
is that we have a function on
the numbers from 1 up to n.
So remember that that notation
is the integers from 1 up to n
And I have a function.
OK.
And then I'm going to think
about what happens when
I reduce these integers mod p.
So I'll have pi p of f.
That's a function
from Z mod p to C.
And the definition is like this.
Pi p f of a is defined to
be the sum over all the n
equal to a mod p of f of a.
OK.
And the setting of the large
sieve is I have one function f,
but then I consider--
this is a projection of f,
and I consider pi p of f for
many different p's and see what
the typical behavior and
how the different p's
are related to each other.
OK.
Now, as before, we've
seen it sometimes helpful
to separate a function
out into its constant part
and its mean zero part.
So f0 would be--
so take the average value.
So 1 over n, sum n
equals 1 to n, f of n.
So that's the average value.
And then maybe still I
still have a function
on numbers from 1 to n to do.
OK.
And then the high part of f
is f minus the constant part.
So the sum on n
f high of n is 0.
So this is a dangerous
notation with the--
I'll make it a capital H.
OK.
And you can do the same
thing with the projections.
So if I take the projection of
f0, it's 1 over p sum a and Z
by p pi pf of a.
It's a constant function.
And pi p of f pi is pi p
of f minus pi p of epsilon.
OK.
A little tiny
remark, because I was
careful about where to
put the parentheses,
but it doesn't actually matter.
So pi p of f pi is the same
thing as pi p of f high.
And pi p of f0 it's the same
thing as pi p of epsilon.
AUDIENCE: Sorry.
Can you just explain what the
bracket means on the definition
f0 again?
LAWRENCE GUTH: This one here?
AUDIENCE: Yeah, yeah.
LAWRENCE GUTH: So f0 is a
function of, let's say m.
And inside the large
bracket is a number, which
is like the average value of f.
AUDIENCE: So those
are just parentheses.
LAWRENCE GUTH: Those
AUDIENCE: OK.
LAWRENCE GUTH: OK.
So the theme of the large sieve
is that if you take almost
arbitrary function here and
you look at many different
projections, then the
oscillating part of-- the high
frequency part of the
projections will on average be
pretty small, whereas
the constant part--
well, it only depends on
the constant part of f,
but it could be
typically bigger.
OK.
So let me write a theorem
which makes that useless.
I might need just a little more
notation to state our theorem.
OK.
So let's say capital PM is
the set of prime numbers
p prime in the range M over
2 less than p less than M.
So here is the main theorem,
which was proven by Linnik.
It says that if you have
a function N goes to C
and we have an M which goes
up to square root of N,
then if I take the sum p and PM
of pi p of f high L2 squared,
then that is bounded by
N over M times the sum
on N of f high of n squared.
OK.
So it takes a little
bit of work to digest
the statement of this theorem
and what kind of a bound
this is giving us.
So let's digest it together.
And by doing-- we'll digest
it by doing some applications.
And then after that,
we'll come back
and we'll prove this theorem.
OK.
The character in our story is
the primes of size about M,
and it's useful to know
about how many there are.
So a background fact from
analytic number theory
is that the number
of primes about M
is around M over log M,
which very roughly I'm just
going to say is about M.
OK.
So there are about
M terms in this sum.
It sometimes is helpful to
replace the sum by an average.
So a corollary is that
the average p and PM
of pi p of f high L2
squared is less than N
over M squared times the sum
on M of f high of N squared.
OK.
So as a first
application of this,
let's prove an estimate about--
so last time, I gave the
example of the square numbers.
The square numbers have
the interesting property
that if you reduce
the mod p for any p,
you get the quadratic
residues and there are only
p plus 1 over 2 of them.
So let's think about
a situation like that.
Suppose you have a set, and
when you reduce it modulo p,
you get significantly less than
all p of the residue classes.
What does that tell
us about the set?
So there is a corollary if
N is a subset of 1 to N,
and pi p of A is
significantly smaller than p.
So I'm going to say it's
less than 0.99 times p.
Just some constant
that's less than 1.
And for all p would
be interesting,
but I'm going to say for
all the p and PM to the 1/2.
So we only actually are going to
use the primes of size about N
to the 1/2.
Then the conclusion is that the
size of A is bounded by around N
to the 1/2.
This would be the case if was
the set of square numbers.
If A was the set
of square numbers.
This would be
basically half of p.
This would be all the
primes, so in particular
all of those primes.
And this set of square numbers
would have cardinality N
to the 1/2.
OK.
So let's make our function the
characteristic function of A.
All right.
OK.
So if I look at the sum A in Z
mod p of pi p f of a squared.
So let's say that p is
in this, PM to the 1/2.
OK, so how big would this be?
Well, if each of these
entries, if each of these guys
were the same as each other,
then the size of this thing
would be A divided by P.
And it would be squared.
And I'd be summing over p terms.
So if all these
values pi pf of a,
they were all equal
to each other,
they would each have
size size of A over p.
And then the sum
would be like this.
They could be unequal
to each other,
and then by a
Cauchy-Schwarz argument,
this would be even bigger.
OK.
And then simplifying
this a little bit,
it's around A squared
N to the minus 1/2.
Because p is around
N to the 1/2.
OK.
Now, what happens if
we take the high part?
Well, because pi
p-- so the support
of pi p of f that's
contained in pi p of A.
So the size of the support pi p
of f is less than 0.99 times p.
That's enough to say that this
function is not super close
to a constant function in L2.
So that implies that the sum
a in Zp pi p of f pi squared
is around the sum
without the high.
So all of these L2
norms, they're all big.
Does that feel
intuitive to people?
Should we talk about that more?
Yeah.
OK.
So let's call it a lemma.
So lemma is that if I have
a function G on Zp to C--
it's not really important
that this is Zp.
It's just a finite set.
And the support of g has size
significantly less than p.
Then the conclusion is that
the high part of g L2 squared
is around the same
as g L2 squared.
Right.
OK.
So g is g0 plus g high.
And g0 and g high are always
perpendicular to each other.
So the sum of--
so g L2 squared is around g0
L2 squared is equal to g0 L2
squared plus g high L2 squared.
OK.
So OK.
If g0 L2 squared was much
smaller than g L2 squared,
then clearly g high L2
squared would be bigger.
So if g0 L2 squared is less
than 1/2 of g L2 squared,
then we're done.
Otherwise, we go the other way.
So let's say S is the
support of g complement.
And notice that S is at least
some definite fraction of p.
And on S, g high is equal
to, I guess negative g0,
because they have to add up
to 0 because g vanishes on S.
So we get g high L2 squared
is at least the sum in S
of g0 squared.
But since g0 is constant,
this is at least
S over p times g0 L2 squared,
which is then at least--
so S over p is on
the order of 1 and g0
L2 squared is on the
order of g L2 squared.
OK.
So the high part
of this projection
has an L2 norm that's
comparable to the L2 norm
of the whole projection, which
is at least this big in terms
of the size of A.
But the L2 norm
of the high part
of the projection
shouldn't be too
big by our theorem.
So the theorem implies that the
average over p PN to the 1/2
of this same thing is bounded
above by N over M squared.
My M is the square root of
N, so this just cancels.
And then I get the
sum of f of N squared.
So this would be bounded
above by the size of A. OK.
So to summarize, this is bounded
by this is bounded by this.
A squared N to the minus 1/2
bounded by A. A is bounded by N
to the 1/2.
Any questions or
comments about it?
OK.
So I feel like it's interesting
that it matches the examples
of the square numbers.
It's sharp in that context.
But also it would be nice
to discuss more and look
at more examples to try to
get a feel for the numerology
of the equations.
And a helpful
reference point for me
is to look at a random set.
So reference point.
A random set.
OK.
So here we're going to take a
subset of the numbers from 1
to N and we include each number
in A with probability 1/2.
You could also, as an exercise,
play with this probability.
But let's just talk
about 1/2 independently.
OK.
So what would we expect?
Pi p characteristic
function of A.
How would we expect
this to behave?
So this is the number of N from
1 up to N so that N equals A mod
p and N is in capital A. And
each one of those candidates was
chosen with probability 1/2.
So the expected value
over our choice of A.
So over the random choice of
this set A, of pi p1A little a
would be half of the
number of guys here.
So that's essentially
1/2 of N over p.
OK.
Well, you wouldn't necessarily
expect this number to be exactly
N over 2p every time.
We choose randomly, you'll
see some ups and downs.
So the standard deviation of
the number that gets picked here
would be the square root
of the size of this.
So it also would see that
with high probability,
the actual size
of the projection
minus the approximate
size would be bounded
by the square root of this.
And it typically would have
size around this square root.
So for example, if p is
in capital PN to the 1/2,
then the actual size of the
projection minus its expected
size would be
around N to the 1/4.
OK.
So let's compare this
with what our theorem says
about an arbitrary set.
So what we concluded
is for every P in here
and for every A in Z mod
p, we would have this.
So if we took a random set
and then for every P and every
A, the difference between the
actual size of the projection
and its expected size would
be square root of the number
of choices, which would
work out to N to the 1/4.
We're going to compare this to
what our large sieve tells us
about an arbitrary set.
Any questions or comments
about the reference setup?
OK.
So corollary three.
If A is any subset
of numbers up to N,
then if I take the average
over primes of size around N
to the 1/2, and then I take
the average over A and Z mod p,
I take the actual size pi
p1A of A, and I subtract off
the expected size A over p.
So this is what-- so we
have this many elements
and we reduce them all mod p.
I would expect, on average,
that this number of them
would be congruent
to little a mod p.
So then this is bounded by N to
the 1/4 and this matches this.
OK.
So the proof is copy down
what corollary one tells us.
It basically tells us this.
So we're going to plug in
corollary one where p is PN,
where M is N to the 1/2.
That will make this disappear.
And of course, corollary one
tells us that the average p
and PN to the 1/2 sum A in Z mod
p of pi p1 A of A minus A over p
squared is bounded
by the L2 norm of f,
which would be the size of A.
OK.
And that's smaller than N. Then
if I want to replace this sum
by an average, then I'm
going to divide by p,
which has size
around N to the 1/2.
So we replace the
sum by the average,
then this is bounded
by N to the 1/2.
And there's a square here.
So I want to get
rid of the square.
I would use Cauchy-Schwarz.
Get the average on p, average
on A. Get rid of the square.
So that's the proof
of the corollary.
OK.
Right.
So the large sieve is telling
us that if you look at a residue
class with a random p and a
random a, then it behaves--
so you take an arbitrary set,
a worst case, complicated,
any set at all.
But then you look at
a random residue class
with a random p and
a random a, then
it behaves a lot like you
had taken a random set.
So a cute application of this
is if A is the set of primes.
And there's a fun question,
an interesting question
in number theory.
How many primes are there in
some arithmetic progression?
So that's exactly this thing.
A is the set of primes.
And this is telling us
how many primes there
are that are congruent
to a modulo little p.
So the question is,
how evenly distributed
are the primes among
these different arithmetic
progressions?
And the conjecture would
be that for every little p
and every little a that's not
zero, this is always true.
And this corollary
actually makes
some progress towards that.
It says we don't know that it's
true for all the little p's
and all the little a's, but we
know it's true for most of them.
Now, it's a little
bit silly to call
that a corollary
about the primes,
because it uses nothing
about the primes.
It just uses the fact that the
primes are a set of numbers.
OK.
But that line of
reasoning is actually
important in some of the things
we know about the questions.
How well are primes
distributed modulo p?
So next class we'll come
back to the question,
how much do we know
about this function
when A is the set of primes.
And we'll do the
Bombieri-Vinogradov theorem,
which is not quite
the state of the art,
but for many, many
years was the state
of the art about this question.
Yeah.
It uses these ideas
in a crucial way.
Cool.
OK.
So that was my survey of some
applications of this large sieve
inequality.
And next we'll prove the
large sieve inequality itself.
Oh.
Actually, there was one
other thing I wanted to say.
OK.
So imagine that A was
a set of size N over 2.
Then this thing here would
have size about N over p,
which works out to
about N to the 1/2,
and this thing has size
about N to the 1/2.
And the error is
about N to the 1/4.
So this thing here is
the pi p of f sub 0.
And so what we're seeing
here is that the pi p of f0
is much larger than pi p of
f high at most of the points.
So say in L2.
So when we take a set
of size N over 2 and we
look at all these
different projections.
A typical projection
looks almost constant.
It's a constant function plus
something that's much smaller.
So this process of
taking a random function
takes a set with no structure.
And it produces something
that's almost constant.
And people sometimes
use the word
that the projections
are getting smoother.
And when we do the real
analysis version a little bit
later in class, we'll see
that smoother is exactly
the right word.
Cool.
OK.
Yeah.
So I think that's a good
way to summarize what
the large sieve is telling us.
It says if we take
a set A, which
is a pretty decent fraction
of the numbers from 1 to n,
and then when we look at
all the projections of it,
most of those projections
are almost constant.
And that's relevant
for this question
up here, because if we
hypothesize that pi sub p of A
has size smaller than 0.99
of p, that's telling us
the projection is really
not very constant.
That's only possible
for small sets.
So that's where we get that
upper bound on the size of A.
If A was bigger
than that, then it
would start to be the case
that the projections of a
would look pretty
constant, and it would
then it would be impossible that
the support would be that small.
Yeah?
AUDIENCE: What does p tilde
capital P N to the 1/2 mean?
LAWRENCE GUTH: What does--
AUDIENCE: Under the average.
LAWRENCE GUTH: This one?
Oh, sorry.
That's P in.
So capital P N to the 1/2 is the
set of primes of size about N
to the 1/2.
This prime is one of them.
Yeah.
Thanks for-- thanks.
OK.
OK, so next, let's
prove Linnik's theorem.
So the proof of
Linnik's theorem is
based on the Fourier transform.
So we're going to take the
Fourier transform of all
of these characters,
and then we're
going to see how the different
Fourier transforms are
related to each other.
So first let me remind you how
the Fourier transform works
for functions on the integers
and functions on Z mod p.
So f is going to be--
think of it as a function
on the integers, which
is supported in
this set 1 up to N.
And so if I take its Fourier
transform, what does that mean?
The Fourier transform is going
to be a function on R mod Z,
and it's defined by f hat
of Z is the sum on n f of n,
e to the minus 2
pi i ksi dot ksi.
That's the Fourier transform.
And it has a Fourier inversion
and it has a Plancherel.
And they go like this.
Fourier inversion that
tells us that f of n
is the integral from
0 to 1, f hat of ksi,
e to the 2 pi i ksi n d ksi.
And there's a Plancherel,
and it tells us
that the sum on n
of f of n squared
is the integral from 0 to 1
norm of f hat ksi squared d ksi.
OK.
So this is probably the most
familiar backwards from the way
I've written it.
If you started with a function
on R mod Z, a periodic function,
you would take its
Fourier series.
And if you sum the Fourier
series you get the function.
This is the same thing.
We've just chosen
to label the Fourier
series by f and the function
on the circle by f hat.
OK.
And then we will also have
a function on Z mod p.
So suppose I have a function
Z mod p goes to C. Then
its Fourier transform will also
be a function Z mod p goes to C.
And the definition
is g hat of alpha.
So I'll say that this variable
is called a and this variable
is called alpha.
So g hat of alpha
will be the sum a in
Z mod p, g of a, e to the
minus 2 pi i a alpha over p.
And then we have Fourier
inversion, which tells us
that g of a can be recovered
as 1 over p sum alpha
in Z mod p, g hat of alpha,
e to the pi i a alpha over p.
And Plancherel.
That tells us that the sum
on a, norm of g of a squared
is 1 over p times
the sum on alpha norm
of g hat of alpha squared.
OK.
So that's how the
Fourier transforms
works for each of these worlds.
And now we're going
to put it together.
So if I start with a
function on the integers,
I reduce it mod p to get
a function on Z mod p.
How does this Fourier
transform relate
to this Fourier transform?
OK.
So lemma, I'll call
this lemma dictionary.
This is a dictionary between
the integer world and the mod p
world.
And it says that if I take
pi p of f hat of alpha,
it is f hat of alpha over p.
OK.
The proof is just
unwinding the definitions
of what all these
Fourier transforms mean.
So what does it mean,
pi p f hat of alpha?
Pi p f hat of alpha.
That's the sum a in
Z mod p, pi pf of a,
e to the minus 2 pi
i, a alpha over p.
OK.
Now who is pi p f of a?
Sum a and Z mod p,
open parentheses.
Sum n equals a mod p of f of n.
e to the minus 2 pi
i a alpha over p.
All right.
Now if you look at
this double sum,
we're just summing
over all the n's.
And now let's look at the
thing that we're summing.
So n equals a mod p.
That tells us that e to the
minus 2 pi i n alpha over p
is the same as e to the
minus 2 pi i a alpha over p.
Why?
Different n's that are
congruent to a mod p.
So I think of adding a
multiple of p to this n.
That multiple of p-- the
p cancels with that p,
so we're changing
this by an integer,
and it doesn't change
the value of it.
OK.
So this is just the
sum over n, f of n,
e to the minus 2 pi
i n alpha over p.
OK.
Another little remark.
This is something we
basically saw last time,
that if you take the high part
of pi p of f and its L2 norm
squared, you take the high
part of it, what it means
is that we removed
the zero frequency.
So I guess I'll also
call this a lemma,
but it's very similar to
things we've already proved.
So pi p f pi L2 squared is the
sum on the non-zero alphas.
OK.
So now we have a
way of writing--
so let's look at the
theorem we want to prove.
We're going to take a sum over
different p's of the L2 norms
of the high parts of pi p of f.
OK?
These lemmas give us a way of
writing that and translating it
into a sum that involves the
Fourier transform of F. Right.
OK.
Yeah.
I guess one last remark is.
So pi p of f hat of alpha
is f hat of alpha over p.
That's for any function f.
And so if I were to take pi
p of f high hat of alpha,
that would be f
high hat alpha of p.
So now let's write out the left
hand side of Linnik's theorem
using the Fourier transform.
OK.
So the left-hand side of our
theorem, I'll just copy it.
It's the sum p in primes of size
M. Pi p of f, pi hat L2 squared.
OK.
So that's now some p in PM, some
on the non-zero alpha in Zp.
Pi p of f high hat
of alpha squared.
Which is equal to sum p in
PM, sum alpha not equal to 0,
and Zp of f high
hat of alpha over p.
Norm squared.
All right.
Cool.
OK.
So we're taking the Fourier
transform of the high part of f
and evaluating it at a
set of points norm squared
and adding them all up.
Let's visualize
that set of points.
So let's say QM is the
set of alpha over p,
where p is a prime
of size around M,
and alpha is strictly positive
and less than or equal
to p minus 1.
OK.
So the size of QM is
roughly M squared.
So we mentioned before
how many choices are there
for this prime p.
It's about M over log
M, which is roughly
M. And then for each
prime, we're basically
p choices of alpha,
which is also around M,
roughly M squared
of these quotients.
And an important fact
about these quotients
is that they're distributed
quite evenly on the real line.
So there are about
M squared of them,
and the distance between any two
of them is at least M squared.
So here's a lemma.
If alpha 1 over P1 and
alpha 2 over P2 are in QM
and they're not
equal to each other,
then the distance between them
is at least 1 over M squared.
OK.
Proof.
We're just going to put it
over a common denominator.
Alpha 1 over P1
minus alpha 2 over P2
is alpha 1, P2 minus
alpha 2, P2 over P1P2.
By assumption, the
difference is not zero,
and so this numerator
is not zero.
It's an integer, so it
has norm at least one.
So it's at least that big.
OK.
I guess to be
careful I should also
say that if P1 is
different from P2,
then these two are never
equal to each other.
So we never-- so the importance
of making these primes
is that we never have
the same number written
as a fraction in two
different ways here.
So that's also make the
remark that if alpha 1 over P1
equals alpha 2 over
P2 in QM, then it
must be that alpha 1 equals
alpha 2 and P1 equals P2.
OK.
Cool.
All right.
So I'm going to erase
the dictionary lemma
and I'll make a picture of this
set and of what we're doing.
OK.
Here's a picture.
So here's a line from 0 to 1.
And on this line we
have this set, Q sub M,
which is maybe not quite
that evenly spaced,
but it's quite evenly spaced.
So that's Q sub M. OK.
And then we're interested in--
our formula involves
the norm of squared
of the Fourier transform of f.
Let me put that on this axis.
OK.
So this will look
however it looks.
OK.
We'll talk about this
a little bit more.
All right.
So what we're taking
in that sum is
we're finding the actual
values at these points
and we're adding them up.
And this sum might
remind you a little bit
of a Riemann sum that would
help to give an approximation
of this integral.
And indeed we're
going to compare
this sum to this integral.
OK.
Now there is a way
that the sum could
be a lot bigger than
the integral, which
is a narrow peak like this.
If the function is very
big at this one point,
but the peak is
extremely narrow,
then it wouldn't contribute
much to the integral,
but it's still there
as part of our sum.
So it's important to know how
narrow a peak like this can be.
And the heuristic, which
is similar to heuristic
we've talked about before,
is that the function
f high hat of ksi is roughly
constant on intervals
of length 1 over n.
Because remember that f is
supported on the numbers
from 1 to n.
So we'll make this
precise in a moment.
So I'll draw in what it means,
that this peak here should
have width at least 1 over n.
And I'll also make a remark that
M is less than or equal to N
to the 1/2.
That's one of the hypotheses
in Linnik's theorem.
And so that guarantees
that the spacing
between consecutive points of QM
is smaller than this 1 over N.
So the picture is right
that this 1 over N
is smaller than the distance
between the different points
of Q. So this is
just a heuristic,
but let's follow it for now.
And we'll see that it
basically gives the inequality
that we want.
And then we can come back
and prove things rigorously.
OK.
So the heuristic tells us that
the sum ksi in QM f high hat
ksi squared is bounded by N
times the integral from 0 to 1
f hat high ksi squared.
Why?
So take one term of this
sum, say from this point.
That one term is bounded
by N times the integral
on this interval
around here of width 1
over N, which is a
piece of this integral.
OK.
Good.
So the rest is just algebra.
It's a little bit annoying to
get all of the constants right
in the algebra,
all the exponents.
And in fact, I have already
mastered up a little bit.
So if we go back here, the
left-hand side of the theorem
is indeed this sum.
I would just copy
that correctly.
And then for the sum,
I did Plancherel.
But when you do
Plancherel mod p,
there's this factor of 1 over
p that I forget frequently.
So there's a 1 over p there.
Now the 1 over p, the
p has size about M.
This is around 1
over M times that.
OK.
All right.
So the left-hand
side of the theorem
is actually around 1 over
M times this sum over here.
So that would be bounded by
N over M times this integral.
And then we use
Plancherel again,
and this time there's no factor
that I have trouble remembering.
So that's N over M sum
on N f high of N squared.
OK.
So this is the Linnik theorem.
Cool.
OK.
Yeah.
Let me mention in this picture.
So we had this theme that
if you take one function
and you reduce it mod p for many
different p's, then most of them
are almost constant.
So why the constant
frequency is special
compared to all the other
frequencies in this story.
OK.
So let me shade in for
one particular prime,
the frequency is alpha over p.
So that would be frequencies
alpha over P1 alpha and z P1.
Let me do it for another prime.
In the color blue, I'll
draw alpha over P2,
alpha in Z mod P2.
What would that look like?
Well, crucially, it
would still have zero
but all the other ones
would be different.
OK.
So now imagine doing this
with all the different primes
in our set of primes P sub M.
I would get a whole rainbow
of different stuff.
Zero would be in every
color, but other than that,
each point is only one color.
There are no other overlaps.
OK.
Now, f hat can be
distributed anyway.
We've assumed nothing
about the function
f, except that it's
supported from 1 to n.
So we know nothing
about its Fourier
transform except
for this heuristic.
So f hat could look
like anything, but--
well, most of the places
that you put f hat--
OK, so one thing
we do know is let's
say we know the sum of
f-- the L2 norm of f.
So we know the L2 norm of f hat.
If you stick some mass of L2
norm of f hat over this point,
it will contribute to this one
prime, but none of the others.
But if you stick
some mass over zero,
it will contribute to everybody.
So zero frequency is being
counted very differently
from any other frequency.
Every other frequency only
contributes to one prime,
but the zero frequency
contributes to all primes.
So therefore, if I start
with my function f,
if it has a decent amount
in the zero frequency,
then all the different p's
also will see a decent amount
in the zero frequency.
And then my function may have
a bunch of other frequencies,
but each one of them is only
contributing to one prime.
If I average over
all the primes,
those get damped down a lot
compared to the zero frequency.
So that's what's going--
that's a possible intuition
about what's going on
in the large sieve.
OK.
So the last thing to round out
our proof of the large sieve
is we'll actually rigorously
prove this heuristic.
Any questions or comments
before we do that?
AUDIENCE: Well, it seems like
we have more freedom to choose f
here than in the real sieve.
We always just
choose [INAUDIBLE].
LAWRENCE GUTH: Yeah.
So the question
is, do we choose f?
So here, f doesn't have to be
the characteristic function
a set.
We've often talked about f being
the characteristic function
of a set.
What's up with that?
We'll also do something
at the end of class,
we'll mention something
in the real setting
where f doesn't have to be
a characteristic function.
Yeah.
So there are some theorems
that become interesting
where f is a characteristic
function of a sparse set,
and that sparsity
comes into play.
And there are others where
f could just be anything.
They're all part of the theory.
OK.
This heuristic, this
locally constant heuristic
is similar to the one
that's on the homework
that you're thinking
through that's due tonight.
And by the way, there
are office hours
after the class for
anybody who would
like to talk about
that or anything else.
Yeah.
So I'll also prove this
in class, and yeah.
All right.
So how does it work?
I'm going to choose a function
psi N, a function Z to C
so that psi N of little n is 1
if N is an integer from 1 to N.
And psi N is also smooth
and rapidly decaying.
OK.
So then when I take the
Fourier transform of psi N,
it behaves like this.
So it's around N
if the frequency
ksi has size less than 1 over N,
and then it's rapidly decaying.
So in pictures-- so ksi is
only well-defined modulo 1.
And in this context, it's nice
to draw the modulo 1 is going
from negative 1/2
to positive 1/2, 0.
So this axis has the
norm of psi N hat of ksi.
This is N, and
this distance here
is 1 over N. That's
what it looks like.
OK.
And rapidly decaying could mean
rigorously N times ksi times N.
So once ksi is
bigger than 1 over N,
this thing starts to be
bigger than 1 and kick in.
You could throw in that.
Yeah?
AUDIENCE: So what
does smoothness
mean for a map
from the integers?
LAWRENCE GUTH: Yeah.
What does smoothness mean?
Right.
You could think of
psi as a map that's
defined on the whole
real line, and it's
smooth on the whole
real line, and then
we happen to be evaluating
it at the integers.
Yeah.
OK.
Cool.
Now this is helpful because
f is equal to f times psi N.
So if the support of f is
contained in integers f to N.
And then when we take
the Fourier transform,
we get that f hat is f hat
convolved with psi N hat.
And so in particular, so f hat
at a particular frequency of ksi
is f hat convolved
with psi N hat.
Psi N hat looks like that.
So the norm of f hat is bounded
by the norm of f hat convolved
with psi N hat, and also
the norm of f hat squared
is bounded by the norm of f hat
squared convolved with psi N
hat by Cauchy-Schwarz.
So actually one
feature of this formula
is that the integral of psi
N hat ksi is bounded by 1.
It has height 1
and it has width--
height n and width 1 over n.
AUDIENCE: Sorry.
So psi n hat is the
Fourier transform
of cosine in the sense
of real function?
Or it is a reference
point in the sense of--
LAWRENCE GUTH: OK.
Yeah.
That's a good question.
OK.
All right.
So phi, I had originally said,
is a function on the integers.
But in answer to the question,
what does it mean to be smooth?
I said, we should
also think of it
as a function on the real line.
So I'll call them
psi n integers.
That's our function
on the integers.
Psi N real line.
That's a function
on the real line.
And they each have
a Fourier transform.
Psi n on the integers
hat of ksi is
the sum over integers psi n of
n, e to the minus 2 pi i n ksi.
And psi n, if you think of
it as a real valued function,
it has a Fourier transform.
And ksi, that's defined to be
the integral over the real line.
Psi n of x, e to the
minus 2 pi i x ksi dx.
OK.
So the question was, when I
write psi n hat, which one
of these two things do I mean?
OK.
So I mean this one, but
they're equal to each other.
So the Poisson
summation theorem says
that psi n z hat is equal to--
oops.
Is equal to.
Is that right?
Wait, wait, wait.
So these are closely related.
Let me think for a second.
Yeah.
So this guy is the sum of z in
z of psi n R hat of ksi plus z.
OK.
So we should make two pictures.
In yellow, I will
draw psi n R hat of z.
And let's extend this.
It looks basically the same.
And then it gets really small
and it stays really small.
And what does-- so in blue,
I'll do psi n z hat ksi.
It looks really almost the same
except this one is periodic.
This Fourier transform
is defined on R modulo z,
so it's going to be periodic.
Z periodic.
So then here at minus 1,
it's going to go up again.
There's going to be
an identical copy.
The blue one is z periodic.
OK.
So if you compare.
So then if you look
at this formula,
also, it's taking this
function and turning it
into a z periodic function
by periodizing it.
And since this function
originally was extremely
localized to between
minus 1/2 and 1/2,
it almost looks like I took the
yellow function and I just took
copies of it and put them here.
So the copy over here can--
yeah.
Sorry.
OK.
Anyway, so that's
what this one--
that's what this one looks like
and what this one looks like.
OK.
So to prove this
estimate, first you
prove it for psi n R. And
you can do that using Fourier
analysis over R. And
you use the smoothness
and you integrate
by parts many times.
And then to study the 1 over
z, you use this formula.
And because this guy
is decaying so rapidly,
the contribution from the-- so
if this ksi is between minus one
half and one half,
then the contribution
coming from integers z other
than 0 is incredibly small.
Anyway.
So using the bounds
for this one you
use to give bounds for this one.
OK.
Thanks for those
questions, everybody.
That was helpful.
So now we're going to do a
slightly more rigorous version
of this argument.
So rigorous proof.
So the left-hand
side, we decided,
was around 1 over
M times the sum
over the frequencies in QM of
f high hat ksi norm squared.
That part was rigorous before.
We didn't need to
make it rigorous.
But now we need to relate
this sum to an integral.
And we use this fact here.
This fact encodes the idea
that this quantity is locally
constant at the scale
1 over N. So this
is bounded by 1
over M sum ksi in QM
of the integral f hat
squared of omega times psi n
hat of ksi minus omega d omega.
So this is just writing out
the convolution as an integral.
Now we can bring
this sum inside.
So this is 1 over M
integral f high hat
of omega squared
times the sum over ksi
in QM of psi n hat of
ksi minus omega d omega.
OK.
And this sum we can
bound by N. Why?
Because each term in the sum
has size at least around N.
This term is a bump, essentially
a bump of height N and width 1
over N around ksi.
And the distance between any two
different ksi's is at least 1
over N, so those bumps don't
overlap with each other.
Now, the bumps aren't
quite compactly supported.
They have the tails that
you can see in the picture,
but the tails are
incredibly tiny.
And so if you just plug in
the rapidly decaying bound,
the tails don't contribute
anything and you get this bound.
OK.
Then if you take out this n,
you have what we had before.
N over M, integral from 0 to
1, f high hat squared ksi,
ksi, N over M sum f
high of N norm squared.
And that's the proof of
Linnik's large sieve.
Cool.
So we only have a little bit of
time left, about five minutes.
We could either, if
people have things
you want to talk about we could
just talk for five minutes.
Or I could set up the
next thing and try
to give a feeling
of how something
in real variable setting
is analogous to this thing
in a number theoretic setting.
OK.
So I could give a little--
try to give a little
teaser, preview,
foreshadowing of how this same
idea occurs in real analysis.
I want to keep this picture.
OK.
The thing that we
proved is if you
have a function on the
integers from 1 to N,
then when you project it mod
p, most of the projections
look almost constant.
They look smoother than
the original function.
And there's a totally analogous
phenomenon in R to the D.
If you have a
function on R to the D
and you consider
projections onto lower
dimensional subspaces,
then almost all of them
look smoother than
the original function.
And like we mentioned
on the first day,
if you're in high
enough dimension,
if you take a function and you
project it onto a typical line,
even if the initial
function is only in L2
and is nowhere continuous,
on a typical line,
the projection will be
continuous and even C1
and even C2.
So the projections
are much smoother
than the original function.
OK.
So here is a setup
for this that's
kind of analogous
to the large sieve.
So we have a function
on R to the D,
and then we'll have
v contained in R
to the D which is a subspace.
And if you have a function-- so
pi V of f is the projection of f
onto this plane.
So that's a function
from V to C.
OK.
So now I have a
remark that if you
have any function of
this vector space V, then
its Fourier transform is also
defined on the vector space V.
OK.
And there's a dictionary lemma.
How is the Fourier
transform of the projection
related to the Fourier transform
of the original function?
And it says that pi V of f hat
is just f hat restricted to V.
So this is a function
on the vector space
V. Its Fourier
transform is supposed
to be a function
on the vector space
V. f hat is a function
on R to the D.
But this Fourier transform is
just f hat restricted to that,
to V. OK.
So now make a picture.
So here is R to the D,
and inside of there,
there's the space V1 and
there's another space V2.
Whoops.
OK.
And I let you
imagine other ones.
They're all
subspaces, so they all
go through zero, although
my picture was not perfect.
And I want you to imagine
this as Fourier space.
So we have a function
f. f is just in L2.
Say it's an L2 function
on the unit ball.
So its Fourier transform
could be anywhere here.
And all we know
about it is say we
know the L2 norm of f, so we
know the L2 norm of f hat.
Could be anywhere.
If you happen to put some
L2 norm of f hat near 0,
then that will be part of
the Fourier transform of pi V
for all the different V's.
But if you put some of the
L2 mass of f hat over here,
that will contribute to pi V1,
but it won't contribute to most
of the other pi V's.
So therefore, when you
take a random projection,
the part of the Fourier
transform at low frequencies
is more highly represented and
the part at high frequencies
is less highly represented.
So a typical projection.
So initially the
Fourier transform
could have been anywhere,
but then a typical projection
will now have its
Fourier transform
concentrated at low frequencies,
which makes it look smooth.
OK.
So here's a statement
like that that we
will prove next time by the
analogous reasoning theorem.
If f is an L2 function on R
to the D supported in the unit
ball, and if D is big enough,
then for almost every--
so then if I take the
average over theta in the D
minus 1 sphere of pi theta of f.
So this means I take
f and I project it
onto the line in
the theta direction.
CK norm of that is bounded
by the L2 norm of f.
OK.
So we'll prove that next time.
But to end, I just
wanted to have
everyone look at the analogy
between these two pictures.
So in Fourier space when
we project our function
onto different
subspaces, then we
have these different
pieces of the Fourier
transform that we're seeing.
And in Fourier space
in the large sieve,
when we take our
function and we project
it mod p for different p, we
have these different color
pieces of the Fourier
space that we're seeing.
And the different color
pieces intersect at 0,
and they don't
intersect anywhere else,
or they don't intersect
very much anywhere else.
And that has the effect that
when you take the projections,
it emphasizes the zero
frequency or the low frequency.
And that plays out slightly
in slightly different ways
in the different settings
but morally very similar.
Cool.
OK.
So let's stop there for today.
I will hang out afterwards,
make office hours talk,
and I will see you next week.